Lastly, we will discuss and look at long-form essay for class 3. Since we have more words to play with, we can start going in-depth and look at specific topics. We can also add sub-heads and paragraph breaks. We will first start with an introduction, followed by the subheads.

The Earth is unique. It is indeed one of a kind. When the Big Bang occurred, the right elements, temperature and pressure (among other factors) created the Earth. Subsequently, the topography and the organisms emerged. Years of evolution have brought us to today, where we can study and understand not only the Earth but also other planets and galaxies.  

What Is Earth? 
The word ‘Earth’ is a Germanic word which simply means “the ground.” Earth is the only planet known that homes and nurtures living organisms such as ourselves. It is the fifth largest planet in our Solar System. It is also the only planet which has water on its surface. About 71% of the Earth’s surface is water, while the remaining 29% is land. It has one natural satellite, the Moon. 

Origin Of The Planet Earth 
The beginning of our Universe was the Big Bang. It was too hot, but it slowly cooled down. Different particles started bumping into each other, eventually forming common elements. Our solar system was formed roughly 8.7 years after the Big Bang. All solar systems begin in the same way – from Nebulas. Collapsing of dust and gas molecules within the nebulae causes the formation of planets and stars. The gravitational pull comes into action here and pulls the gas molecules and dust particles together. As these particles increase in size, the attraction between the molecules increases. This eventually forms a planet. However, the planet was still too hot to sustain life. Eventually, the planet began cooling down. The oceans are where the origin of life occurred. Slowly, evolution caused organisms to move onto land too. Over millions of years, the Earth has gone through many cycles of heating up and cooling down. This has resulted in mass extinctions and the wipeout of civilizations and organisms. However, planet Earth has managed to give birth to new organisms and help them evolve every single time. 

Different Layers Of The Earth 
The Earth is made up of three layers – The Crust, The Mantle and The Core 

1. The Crust  

This is the outer-most part of the Earth. It is mostly made up of solid rock and minerals. It is about 40km in thickness and is only 1% of the Earth’s mass. However, this part of the Earth harbours all known life in the Universe.  

2. The Mantle 

This is the middle part of the Earth. It is about 2900kms in thickness, and it consists of hot, dense, iron and magnesium-rich solid rock. The Crust and the Mantle make up the lithosphere, which is broken into plates, both large and small.  

3. The Core 

The core is the innermost part of the Earth. It is further divided into two parts – the liquid outer core and the solid inner core. The temperatures here can rise upwards of 50,000 C.  

Motion Of The Earth 
The Earth has mainly two motions – Rotation and Revolution.  

1. Rotation

The Earth rotates on its axis in a clockwise motion. It takes the Earth 23.9 hours to complete one rotation on its axis. The rotation of the Earth causes the change in day and night. 

2. Revolution

The Earth revolves around the Sun in a fixed orbit in an anticlockwise direction. It takes the Earth 365 days, 6 hours, and 9 minutes to complete one rotation around the Sun. The revolution of the Earth causes the change in seasons.  

How Can We Protect The Mother Earth? 
There are many ways we can protect our Earth. Some ways are: 

Be conscious about overusing and overexploiting resources. 
Conserve energy, both fuel and electricity. 
Do not pollute your surroundings, especially with plastic. 
Remember the 3Rs – Reuse, Recycle and Reduce. 
Strive to conserve your local flora and fauna.  
Amazing Facts About Earth For Kids
Below are something amazing facts about our Earth for kids:

The name ‘Earth’ comes from the old English and Germanic words that mean ‘the ground’.  
The Earth orbits around the sun at a whopping speed of 30 kilometres per second! 
The Earth’s diameter is 12,800 kilometres, making it the 5th largest planet in our solar system. 
The Earth is the only planet known to support life. The availability of abundant oxygen and water makes this possible. 
Due to the Moon slowing down Earth’s rotation, the days on Earth are, in fact, getting longer! 
What Will Your Child Learn From The Essay On Earth? 
Your child will learn a lot about our planet, its origins, its movements, etc. The essay on planet earth will also help your child learn how to write a good composition with perfect techniques. This article takes you through essay writing in a step-by-step manner.